Extended configurable logging concept (#656)
kyma-project/community: concepts/observability-configurable-logging/05-custom-fluentbit-operator.md

### Workflow for the User

To configure Fluent Bit, the user must create a new CR regarding to the CRD of this operator. Then, this operator will notice the new or changed CR, and will create or update a ConfigMap for Fluent Bit. Before the ConfigMap is applied, the operator uses the `dry-run` feature of Fluent Bit to validate the new configuration. If the check was successful, the new ConfigMap is applied and Fluent Bit is restarted.

## Fluent-Bit Log Routing

> The LogPipeline CRD enables the user to define filter and output elements of a Fluent Bit pipeline. Therefore, a tag that can be consumed by user defined pipeline elements has to be provided by Kyma (either the static Fluent Bit configuration or the telemetry-operator). The different options to provide a log stream under a specific tag will be described in this section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The LogPipeline CRD enables the user to define filter and output elements of a Fluent Bit pipeline. Therefore, a tag that can be consumed by user-defined pipeline elements must be provided by Kyma (either the static Fluent Bit configuration or the telemetry operator). The following section describes the different options to provide a log stream under a specific tag.
```

> Log pipelines should be isolated in a way that a dysfunctional pipeline should not affect the availability of other pipelines. A pipeline can for instance become unavailable by an unavailable backend or faulty configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Log pipelines must be isolated in a way that a dysfunctional pipeline doesn't affect the availability of other pipelines; for example, when a pipeline becomes unavailable by an unavailable backend or faulty configuration.
```

> The following requirements for the telemetry-operator should be considered when choosing a sufficient Fluent Bit configuration:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following requirements for the telemetry operator should be considered when choosing a sufficient Fluent Bit configuration:
```

> * Fluent Bit pods and the used image should be managed by Kyma

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Fluent Bit pods and the used image should be managed by Kyma.
```

> * User-provided configuration parts should be as close as possible to the Fluent Bit configuration format

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* User-provided configuration parts should be as close as possible to the Fluent Bit configuration format.
```

* Filters can be used to
  * Parse workload specific log formats (for instance, multi-line exceptions)
  * Include or exclude parts of the logs (ship only a specific namespace to a backend)
  * Prepare the log metadata to comply with the backend's requirements (de-dotting for Elastic)

> ### Tags managed by the telemetry-operator

Reviewer 2: Does it make sense to list these headings as `Ideas`? Or `Scenarios`?

> ### Tags managed by the telemetry-operator

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Tags managed by the telemetry operator
```

Properties:

> * The user-defined LogPipeline elements must not contain any "match" attributes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The user-defined LogPipeline elements must not contain any "match" attributes.
```

> * Pipeline elements that emit new tags (for instance rewrite_tag filters) must not be used

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Pipeline elements that emit new tags (for example, `rewrite_tag` filters) must not be used
```

> * The telemetry-operator adds ad "match" attribute to all filters and outputs

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* The telemetry-operator adds a "match" attribute to all filters and outputs
```

> * The telemetry-operator adds ad "match" attribute to all filters and outputs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The telemetry operator adds a "match" attribute to all filters and outputs.
```

Consequences:

> * Fill control over resource consumption since no additional buffers can be created

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Full control over resource consumption since no additional buffers can be created
```

Reviewer 2: Maybe we can split `Consequences` into `Advantages` and `Disadvantages` to make it more clear that we are evaluating pros and cons for  architectural decisions here?

> * Fill control over resource consumption since no additional buffers can be created

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Full control over resource consumption because no additional buffers can be created.
```

> * Design goal to allow pasting existing Fluent Bit config samples is partially lost

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Design goal to allow pasting existing Fluent Bit config samples is partially lost.
```

### Managed tag per pipeline

Properties:

> * The telemetry-operator provides a specific tag for each LogPipeline that has to be consumed by the pipeline sections

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The telemetry operator provides a specific tag for each Log Pipeline that must be consumed by the pipeline sections.
```

>   * The telemetry-operator creates either a dedicated input plugin or buffered rewrite_tag filter to isolate the pipeline

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * The telemetry operator creates either a dedicated input plugin or buffered `rewrite_tag` filter to isolate the pipeline.
```

> * There is a defined way to consume the operator-provided log stream (for instance a tag placeholder or documented naming pattern)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* There is a defined way to consume the operator-provided log stream (for example, a tag placeholder or documented naming pattern).
```

> * The LogPipeline can emit new tags using the rewrite_tag filter

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The Log Pipeline can emit new tags using the `rewrite_tag` filter.
```

> * Potential overhead since complex pipelines have to be split to multiple simple pipelines, each having an own buffer

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Potential overhead since complex pipelines have to be split into multiple simple pipelines, each having an own buffer
```

> * Potential overhead since complex pipelines have to be split to multiple simple pipelines, each having an own buffer

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Potential overhead because complex pipelines must be split into multiple simple pipelines, each having its own buffer.
```

Consequences:

> * Full flexibility to use all Fluent Bit concepts for the user

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* There's full flexibility to use all Fluent Bit concepts for the user.
```

(Consistency - the other two bullets are full sentences)

> * The "contract" gives flexibility to change the implementation afterwards (for instance switch to an own input per pipeline or even an own DaemonSet)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The "contract" gives flexibility to change the implementation afterwards (for example, switch to an own input per pipeline or even an own DaemonSet).
```

> * User can create elements that increase the resource consumption

Reviewer 2: Maybe a little vague? What elements, are there examples?

> * User can create elements that increase the resource consumption

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* User can create elements that increase the resource consumption.
```

> * Allows describing complex pipelines and thus reduce the overall resource consumption

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* We can describe complex pipelines and thus reduce the overall resource consumption.
```

### Managed Fluent Bit DaemonSet per LogPipeline

Properties:

> * The telemetry-operator creates a dedicated Fluent Bit DaemonSet per LogPipeline

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The telemetry operator creates a dedicated Fluent Bit DaemonSet per Log Pipeline.
```

> * All DaemonSets have configured the same input and Kubernetes filter sections

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* All Daemon Sets have configured the same input and Kubernetes filter sections.
```

Author: Would keep DaemonSet since it is the name of a Kubernetes resource

Reviewer: Our [style guide](https://kyma-project.io/community/guidelines/content-guidelines/02-style-and-terminology/#capitalized-terms) says:

> Use natural language when referring to Kubernetes resources. Do not use CamelCase.

Author: Thanks! Tried to fix all usages of camel case in the document

Consequences:
* Best possible isolation between different pipelines
* Highest resource consumption

> * Telemetry-operator has to manage the DaemonSets and not only ConfigMaps

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Telemetry operator must manage the Daemon Sets and not only the Config Maps
```

Author: Would keep DaemonSet and ConfigMap since it is the name of a Kubernetes resource

Reviewer: Our [style guide](https://kyma-project.io/community/guidelines/content-guidelines/02-style-and-terminology/#capitalized-terms) says:

> Use natural language when referring to Kubernetes resources. Do not use CamelCase.

> * Support for custom output plugins might be added by the option to specify an own Fluent Bit image

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Support for custom output plugins might be added by specifying a dedicated Fluent Bit image
```
Not sure whether "by the option to" adds any meaning. Correct me if I misunderstand that.

 
### All LogPipelines use the same base-tag

Properties
* Current state of telemetry chart (2022-04-12)

> * All LogPipelines match to kube.*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* All Log Pipelines match to kube.*
```

Author: LogPipline is the name of our custom resource definition, would keep it as one word. Made the meaning of "match" a bit clearer.

Reviewer: Thank you! 
Basically, we're trying to avoid camel case. As our [style guide](https://kyma-project.io/community/guidelines/content-guidelines/02-style-and-terminology/#capitalized-terms) says:

> Use natural language when referring to Kubernetes resources. Do not use CamelCase.

Consequences:

> * Additional filters can be injected to any pipeline

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Additional filters can be injected to any pipeline; for example, to modify the default Loki output
```

>   * Allows to modify default Loki output

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * Possibility to modify default Loki output
```

> * Low resource consumption, but user has the control to add additional buffers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Low resource consumption, but user has the control to add additional buffers.
```

> * A dysfunctional output stalls all pipelines (no isolation)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* No isolation: A dysfunctional output stalls all pipelines.
```

  * Parse workload-specific log formats (for example, multi-line exceptions)
  * Include or exclude parts of the logs (ship only a specific namespace to a backend)
  * Prepare the log metadata to comply with the backend's requirements (de-dotting for Elastic)

### Scenario 1: Tags managed by the telemetry operator

Properties:
* The user-defined LogPipeline elements must not contain any "match" attributes.
* Pipeline elements that emit new tags (for example, `rewrite_tag` filters) must not be used.
* The telemetry operator adds a "match" attribute to all filters and outputs.

Advantages:
* Full control over resource consumption because no additional buffers can be created.

Disadvantages:
* Design goal to allow pasting existing Fluent Bit config samples is partially lost.

### Scenario 2: Managed tag per pipeline

Properties:
* The telemetry operator provides a specific tag for each LogPipeline that must be consumed by the pipeline sections.
* There is a defined way to consume the operator-provided log stream (for example, a tag placeholder or documented naming pattern).
* The LogPipeline can emit new tags using the `rewrite_tag` filter.

> * Potential overhead because complex pipelines must be split into multiple simple pipelines, each having its own buffer.

Reviewer: Is that a property or a disadvantage?

Author: A disadvantage

Reviewer: But we ...prefer to keep it under "Properties", not "Disadvantages" ? 🤔

Author: Good catch, moved it

Advantages:
* There's full flexibility to use all Fluent Bit concepts for the user.
* The "contract" gives flexibility to change the implementation afterwards (for example, switch to an own input per pipeline or even an own DaemonSet).
* We can describe complex pipelines and thus reduce the overall resource consumption.
 
Disadvantages:
* Users can increase the resource consumption by adding `rewrite_tag` filters with a buffer.

### Scenario 3: All LogPipelines use the same base-tag

Properties
* Current state of telemetry chart (2022-04-12)

> * All LogPipelines subscribe the `kube.*` tag using the `match` property

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* All LogPipelines subscribe the `kube.*` tag using the `match` property.
```
Now I understand it! Thanks for rephrasing :)

Advantages:
* Expected good isolation between different pipelines. Details have to be evaluated.

Disadvantages:
* Potential resource overhead through additional buffer requirement.
* It is not possible to inject filters to existing pipelines.

### Setup 3: Single input plugin with buffered `rewrite_tag` filter per LogPipeline

Properties:
* The Fluent Bit setup has a single tail input plugin with Kubernetes filter.
* Each LogPipeline gets its own log stream, provided by a `reqrite_tag` filter.

Advantages / Disadvantages:
* Isolation and resource consumption behaviour under different buffer settings has to be evaluated.

### Setup 4: Shared input plugin

Properties:
* The static part of the Fluent Bit configuration contains a shared tail input plugin and Kubernetes filter.
* All LogPipelines can access the given input by consuming a predefined tag.

Advantages:
* No additional implementation effort required.
* Single buffer for the input plugin.
* Users can add additional filters or parsers to the default Loki pipeline.

Disadvantages:
* A dysfunctional output stalls all pipelines (no isolation).

> The possible log routing scenarios from the previous section can be used in the following combinations with the Fluent Bit input configurations:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The possible log routing scenarios from the previous section offer the following combinations with the Fluent Bit input configurations:
```
simpler, shorter, active :)

> |                 | Scenario 1 | Scenario 2 | Scenario 3 |

Reviewer: excellent idea to present it as table, very nice overview!
